ORIGINAL ARTICLE Bulletin of the Maritime Institute in Gdańsk Concept of connection between the Mukhavets and the Bug river as an element of International Waterway E40 development on the PolishBelarusian border Koncepcja połączenia rzeki Muchawiec z rzeką Bug jako element rozwoju Międzynarodowej Drogi Wodnej E40 na granicy Polsko-Białoruskiej Marcin Kalinowski, Witold Kuszewski Instytut Morski w Gdańsku. Zakład Ekonomiki i Prawa Abstract: International waterway E40 is part of the European inland waterway network of transnational importance. It is a specific link between two seas: the Baltic and the Black Sea. The route runs through three countries, Poland, Belarus, and Ukraine. The article presents the problem of the missing link on E40 IWW, particularly, the lack of adequate quality connection between the Bug and Mukhavets rivers. This missing link is on the Polish-Belarusian border in the high historical value - the fortress of Brest. The article shows three variants of connection. The concepts should not be taken as final projects recommended by the countries through which the concerned section of E40 runs. The article will be useful to create a strategy for the revitalization of international waterway E40 in Poland and will facilitate the decision on the accession and signing of the AGN Convention. The article can also be initial material supporting policies and companies’ development conducting their business, based on infrastructure along the E40 waterway. Keywords: Bypass water channel, AGN convention, E40 Inland Waterway, revitalization, inland navigation Streszczenie: Międzynarodowa droga wodna E40 wpisana jest w sieć dróg wodnych śródlądowych o znaczeniu ponadnarodowym. Stanowi swoisty łącznik dwóch akwenów: Morza Bałtyckiego i Morza Czarnego. Jej trasa przebiega przez trzy kraje Polskę, Białoruś i Ukrainę. W artykule przedstawiono problem brakującego ogniwa MDW E40 w postaci braku odpowiedniej jakości połączenia rzeki Bug z rzeką Muchawiec. To brakujące ogniwo znajduje się na granicy Polsko-Białoruskiej w bezpośrednim sąsiedztwie obszaru o dużych walorach historycznych - twierdzy Brześć. Przedstawione w artykule trzy warianty połączenia mają charakter koncepcji i nie mogą być odbierane jako ostateczne projekty rekomendowane przez kraje przez które przebiega rozpatrywany odcinek drogi wodnej E40. Artykuł będzie przydatny do stworzenia strategii rewitalizacji międzynarodowej drogi wodnej E40 w Polsce oraz ułatwi podjęcie decyzji dotyczącej przystąpienia i podpisania przez Polskę konwencji AGN. Artykuł może również stanowić wstępny materiał wspomagający politykę i rozwój firm prowadzących swoją działalność w oparciu o infrastrukturę zlokalizowaną wzdłuż drogi wodnej E40. Słowa kluczowe: Kanał obejściowy, AGN, droga wodna E40, rewitalizacja, żegluga śródlądowa ORIGINAL ARTICLE Bulletin of the Maritime Institute in Gdańsk Introduction Inland waterways shipping is part of the national economy’s system and an element of transport subsystem. Inland waterways companies in the framework of their activity fulfil the transport needs of other sectors of the national and European economy by exporting transport services. Following the transition period of the national economy system in Poland, the demand for transport services picked up in line with the rise in economic development, and the opportunity for exports also raised. The inland waterway link of the Vistula River with the Prypec River via the Bug River, or more precisely via the planned lateral channel (called Eastern Channel in some documents) is a vital element of the European transport policy aimed at revitalisation and development of the integrated inland waterways network. The international waterway E40 linking the Baltic Sea with Black Sea will enable development (or rather restoration) of the transport of goods between Poland, Belaruss, and Ukraine and activate the inland waterways tourism. Dniepr and Prypec are navigable, but require wise modernisation and improvement of the existing infrastructure, when the Polish segment is considered. Special attention should be considered for the border section of E40 waterway on the Polish- -Belarusian border. On the Polish-Belarusian border, between Mukhavets and the Bug, is a fortress of Brest with high historic Fig. 1. Scheme of the Belarusian part of international waterway E40. Source: Own elaboration of Maritime Institute in Gdansk - Department of and cultural value. The location of the fortress is directly in line Economics and Law. with the route of E40. The article uses data collected as part of the Maritime Insti- on the water nodes: no. 10 Triszyn (Brest), no. 9 Nowosady and tute in Gdansk project: “Restoration of E-40 waterway on the no. 8 Zaluzie (both in the Zabinecki region). Because of recent stretch Dnieper – Vistula: from strategy to planning” financed reconstruction of these locks, they meet the requirements of by EU Cross-border Cooperation Programme Poland - Belarus European standard class Va. – Ukraine 2007-2013. In the years 1775-1783, between Pina and Mukhavets rivers, a channel was dug, which was named the Royal Canal. In the Belarusian section of IWW E40 nineteenth century, another straightening channel was dug with improved parameters of shipping - Dnieper-Bug Channel The length of the Belarusian part of international waterway (DBC), and the Royal Canal served only as a means to evacuate E40, running along the Mukhavets river, Dnieper – Bug channel, flood waters and supply water to the navigation channel. DBC Pina and Pripyat rivers (Brest and Gomel regions) is 651 km (Be- joins with the Mukhavets river in Kobrin, and runs along the larusian section of IWW E40 is presented in figure 1). The E40 sparsely populated agricultural areas. The length of the secWaterway in Belarus meets the parameters of a class IV water- tion from the Mukhavets junction with DBC to water junction way, with restrictions on deadweight of vessels. From the Polish no. 2 Pererub (Janowski area) is 92.42 km. - Belarusian border to Belarusian – Ukrainian border, there are four inland river ports of Brest, Pinsk, Mikashevichy, and Pchow A section of the Pina river from the water junction no. 2 Pererub (Mazyr). From Brest along the Mukhavets river and the Dnieper to the Pripyat river mouth is channelled. Waterway passes to the – Bug channel there are nine locks, and between Pinsk and Mi- south through Pinsk city, and the length of this section is 40.8 km. kaszewicze, there are two locks. Clearances under bridges are Pina River after 74 km flows into the Pripyat River, which connects over 7 m and meet the requirements of a class Vb waterway. to the Dnieper River in Ukraine. The total length of Pripyat is 755 Depending on the weather conditions, navigation season on a km. The source of Pripyat is in the north-western part of Ukraine; given section of IWW E40 is between 245 and 270 days a year. the river flows northeast over the border with Belarus, from Mazyr further southeast back to Ukraine before the city of Pripyat, and The navigable section of the E40 waterway in the Republic of after a few kilometres flows into the Dnieper. Belarus starts in Brest, where the closed dam section of the 31 Mukhavets river flows into the Bug river. At a distance of 61.99 According to the “List of the most important barriers and missing km, a river port (Brest) and three navigable locks are situated, links in the network of waterways category E” (Resolution No. ORIGINAL ARTICLE Bulletin of the Maritime Institute in Gdańsk 49 dated October 24th 2002 of Working Group on Inland Water mental reasons; the section should be treated as a link of the Transport of UN European Economic Commission) section of E40 new channel (Vistula - Terespol) with Mukhavets. This section route Brest - Dnieper-Bug channel - Pinsk - Pripyat to the border is navigable only in Belarus - a port of Brest. with Ukraine belongs to the “strategic barriers”, i.e., sections where parameters comply with the basic requirements of class IV but Construction of the waterway with the required parameters should be modernized to improve the structure of the network1. along the whole length of the route is possible by implementing one of the three technologies: ♦♦ Construction of a new bypass channel around Brest, Border section as a missing link of E40 ♦♦ Construction of a new channel through Brest, waterway on the Polish-Belarusian border ♦♦ Carrying out repair work on the existing channel. The study of the Belarusian part of an international waterway E40 The specific location of the link to the given section with the paid attention to the connection of the Mukhavets - Bug. On the new channel (Vistula - Terespol) on Polish territory would be Polish-Belarusian border between Mukhavets and the Bug is a determined at the stage of project documentation, after the fortress of Brest with high historic and cultural value to the most final route of the new channel is determined. outstanding fortification objects of the XIX/XX century. The route of the section connecting the Polish part of the waterway with the Despite the final variant, the analysed section should have Mukhavets river must be done so as not to violate the fortifications. dimensions corresponding to the minimum values for the new channel Vistula - Terespol: depth - 4 m; width - 50 m, the Because of the objections to modernisation of the Bug river on radius of curvature – 650 m. This is due to the possibility of Polish territory, it was decided to opt out of this for environ- creating a multimodal logistics center in Brest: river vessels with a draft of 2.8 m along the restored waterway would re1 Blue Book. (2006). Inventory of Main Standards and Parameters of the E Waterway Network “Blue Book” First Revised Edition, Economic ach Brest from Warsaw, where handling operations would Commission For Europe, Inland Transport Committee (ECE/TRANS/SC.3/144/Rev.) take place, cargo would be shifted on to the trucks, wagons or 32 Fig. 2. First variant of Vistula – Mukhavets channel connection. Source: Maritime Institute in Gdansk - Department of Economics and Law, own elaboration based on OpenStreetMap and materials of the National Academy of Sciences of Belarus ORIGINAL ARTICLE Bulletin of the Maritime Institute in Gdańsk Fig. 3. Second variant of Bug – Mukhavets channel connection. Source: Own elaboration of Maritime Institute in Gdansk - Department of Economics and Law. smaller vessels - up to 2 m draft to be taken by water toward ♦♦ Brest is a big transportation hub, connecting road and Kiev and Kherson. railway transport (normal and wide-gauge tracks), through which large cargo volumes are handled, Construction of a new bypass channel around Brest would be ♦♦ Brest water infrastructure is well-developed (navigable pointless, since: route on Mukhavets river, port of Brest, lock on water junc- ♦♦ This would require a wide range of investments, such as: ture no. 10 Triszyn reconstructed in 2012 with the most ♦♦ construction of an additional shipping channel with min. lockages on the Dnieper-Bug channel). length of 20-30 km, ♦♦ reclassification of large land areas, including agricultural land, Construction of a new water channel through Brest admit- ♦♦ construction of at least 3-5 bridges, tedly requires lower expenditures, but in this case, it is ne- ♦♦ construction of various types of hydrotechnical infrastructure. cessary to significantly change the general plan of city in- ♦♦ existing infrastructure that may allow for future organisa- frastructure development. The most realistic variants seem 33 tion of multimodal transport would not be used effecti- to be two connections extending outside the complex of vely: Brest Fortress. ORIGINAL ARTICLE Bulletin of the Maritime Institute in Gdańsk Fig. 4. Scheme of Bug river and Mukhavets river connection through historical area of Brest – Brest Fortress Source: Materials from second proceedings of the E40 Commission Meeting in Brest, November 17, 2015 First variant of Bug – Mukhavets connection Brest on November 17, 2015, a new variant of the connection of the Bug River with the Mukhavets river was presenThe first variant envisages that the channel will be connected ted (Fig. 4) 2. The Commission includes 76 experts and four to the Bug River in the vicinity at 284 km, about 350 meters working groups: north of the national road no. 2 (NR 2). Further, the channel will run between Brest Fortress and NR 2 and turn to the Mu- Working Group 1. Development of water transport and crosskhavets river near the Brest river port. If the first variant of the -border economic development. route channel Vistula - Terespol is chosen, to bypass the Brest Fortress, there will be a need to perform an additional bypass Working Group 2. E-40 waterway in the context of spatial deon the Polish side. The first variant is presented on fig. 2. velopment of cross-border regions. Working Group 3. Cross-border water resources and environment. Second variant of Bug – Mukhavets connection Working Group 4. Promotion of restoration of the DnieperThe route of the second variant begins at the entrance to the -Vistula waterway connection at the European national and Bug river, about 200 meters south to the NR 2. It runs between regional levels. buildings and NR 2, which intersects and creates the need for construction of a hydrotechnical building, i.e., bridge for NR2 or The concept assumes to carry out the required hydrotechnical water bridge for channel. It ultimately joins the Mukhavets river works to revive shipping on the E40 waterway passing throapproximately 1 km east to the first connection variant. The se- ugh the Brest area on the historically formed waterway: from cond variant is presented on fig. 3. the Mukhavets river – with existing riverbed - to Bug river. According to the Commission, the proposed variant is optimal in terms of planning and in terms of necessary investment Third variant of Bug – Mukhavets connection expenditures. 34 During the second meeting of the Commission for deve- 2 The concept was recommended for further investigation, according to the minutes of the meeting of representatives of organizations concerned and with the participation of Deputy Chairman of the Brest Regional Executive Committee W. Je. Sakowski held in Brest on lopment of the E40 waterway on Dniepr-Vistula Section in November 6, 2015. ORIGINAL ARTICLE Bulletin of the Maritime Institute in Gdańsk The decision on the route variant of the connection between the ♦♦ Developing the regions, in particular, as a result of the inVistula-Bug channel with Mukhavets river requires further ana- vestment, lysis. In the opinion of the experts, the final decision should be ♦♦ Increasing the investment attractiveness of regions, taken at the preparation stage of investment implementation. ♦♦ Creating new jobs, ♦♦ Improving transport accessibility, ♦♦ Improving the transport density of the area influenced by Role of Dnieper – Bug channel in Bug river the investment, and Mukhavets river ♦♦ Strengthening international cooperation, ♦♦ Promoting a sustainable development idea, Dnieper-Bug channel (D-BC), crossing the watershed between ♦♦ Extending the service offer of economic centers, etc. the two rivers, is divided into three distinct parts: ♦♦ western section with a length of 64 km from Brest to Kobryn, The analysis of impact of connection between the Mukhavets ♦♦ watershed section with a length of 58 km from Kobryn to and the Bug river as an element of International Waterway Lachowicze in the Drohiczynski area, E40 considers both positive and negative externalities: ♦♦ eastern section with a length of 47 km from Lachowicze to Duboj village. Impact on the transport system - the cost of transport, routing, mode selection, the choice of time of departure and arrival - The main part of the channel has a length of 156 km and a made by the users of the part of the network covered by the catchment area of 8,500 km2. A channel width of 40 m, at a project of revitalization E40. depth of 2.4 m in normal operation, changes the cross-section into half trench - half embankment. Effects on behaviour choices within the transport system carried onto other network users who are not users of the neThere is no direct connection by inland waterway between twork, (e.g., possible modal shift at the area of the waterway Dnieper-Bug channel and Western Europe. The reason for this investment). is the location of a fixed lock on the Mukhavets river in Brest. For the successful implementation of the revitalization project Effects outside the transport network as a result of the proalong E40 waterway, it is necessary to solve the problems of re- ject of connection between the Mukhavets and the Bug river construction of D-BC and necessary hydrotechnical structures on transport infrastructure, including general changes in proand provide adequate water supply. ductivity, employment, and population of residents in specific locations (e.g., households moved into the city due to better The need to improve water relations in D-BC is due to pro- connection with job market thanks to the new connection). blems of technical and ecological nature. Periodic shortages of water on the watershed are strictly connected with water col- The impact on the selection of the transport mode in other lection in dry years from the upper Pripyat river in Ukraine by markets (real estate markets, labour market, product markets, the Power System of White Lake (PSWL). and capital) because of changes in the total costs4. Assessment of possible impact Conclusions of an improved E40 waterway Undoubtedly, inland waterways and other transport routes are Infrastructure of inland waterways has several important among the factors integrating economic space. Transport and functions related to flood protection, retention of water, ener- tourist use of E40 IWW will contribute to the economic integy, tourism, recreation, public utilities, etc. Inland waterway gration of Eastern Europe with EU countries and will improve transport is one of the cheapest and most environmentally the competitive position of Poland and other countries and friendly modes of transport. It is characterized by: a) lowest regions along this route. It is especially important to increase energy consumption, b) low emission of air and water pollu- the attractiveness of the regions economically lagging behind tants, c) low external costs, and d) low accident rate3. and generate development impulses for improving economic efficiency. Transport infrastructure, including the infrastrucRevitalization of inland waterway E40 by connection between the ture of inland waterway transport, plays a key role in develoMukhavets and the Bug, apart from those indicated above me- ping economic ties and creating growth poles. Taking these asurable socioeconomic benefits and costs, will evoke costs and factors into account, it is important to streamline E40 IWW benefits that cannot be expressed in numerical values, including: over its entire length through the liquidation of barriers and ♦♦ Improving flood protection, alleviation of bottlenecks. The article presents consequences ♦♦ Improving the water supply of the population and business, of “bottlenecks” and the steps that should be taken to remedy ♦♦ Retaining water and possibility to tackle drought, the situation. 3 Program rozwoju infrastruktury transportu wodnego śródlądowego w Polsce, Część 1. Analiza funkcjonowania transportu wodnego 4 Kalinowski M., Koba R., Kowalczyk U., (2016). Using cost-benefit analysis as a method of more efficient allocation of inland waterway śródlądowego oraz turystyki wodnej w Polsce. Ecorys, Warszawa, Rotterdam 2011. E40 resources. Bulletin of the Maritime Institute in Gdańsk Volume 31 No. 1 ORIGINAL ARTICLE Bulletin of the Maritime Institute in Gdańsk Most of the E40 IWW has large capacities, but its full use is policies of some governments were criticised, observing it hindered by several “bottlenecks” caused by small transit pa- gives priority to other branches of transport and does not put rameters, small bridge span, and lock dimensions, which limit enough stress on maintenance of waterways and eliminating its competitiveness in relation to other modes of transport, “bottlenecks” in the network. The European Commission foreincluding road and rail. A development plan should be imple- casts that, of all modes of transport, inland waterways will be mented for the improvement and maintenance of waterway recorded until 2020, with the largest increase in freight traffic infrastructure and transhipment points to improve pan-Euro- in Europe. pean inland waterway transport, while respecting the requirements in environmental protection. The network of waterways The above article presents consequences of “bottlenecks”, and according to the assessment of the EU can handle 425 million necessary steps should be taken by the governments of the tons of cargo annually. At the same time, current investment countries along IWW E40. References: [1] Blue Book. (2006). Inventory of Main Standards and Parameters of the E Waterway [11] Majewski W. (2009). Przepływ w kanałach otwartych z uwzględnieniem zjawisk Network “Blue Book” First Revised Edition, Economic Commission For Europe, Inland lodowych. Instytut Meteorologii i Gospodarki Wodnej, Warszawa. Transport Committee (ECE/TRANS/SC.3/144/Rev.) [12] White paper on Efficient and Sustainable Inland Water Transport. Map of the AGN [2] Dane Krajowego Zarządu Gospodarki Wodnej (2015) network. Inland Transport Committee. UNECE New York and Geneva (2011). [3] DHV HYDROPROJEKT, Droga Wodna E40 – Przebieg Drogi Wodnej E40 na terenie [13] MasterPlan dla obszaru dorzecza Wisły, Krajowy Zarząd Gospodarki Wodnej, Warszawa (2014) Polski na odcinku od Terespola do Dęblina, Warszawa (2015) [14] Materiały Politechniki Gdańskiej, Katedry Hydrotechniki (2015) [4] Gawlik I., Szajda J., (2003). Zmiany warunków glebowych na torfowiskach w regionie Kanału [15] Portal map GIS OpenStreetMap (2015) Wieprz-Krzna wskutek ich odwodnienia. Wiadomości Melioracyjne i Łąkarskie no. 3 167-170. [16] Regulacja rzek i drogi wodne. (1988) Materiał Instytutu Geotechniki, Wydawnictwo [5] Informator Nawigacyjny, Regionalny Zarząd Gospodarki Wodnej, Warszawa (2009) Politechniki Wrocławskiej, Wrocław. [6] Inventory of Most Important Bottlenecks and Missing Links in the E Waterway [17] Rekonstrukcja Kanału Dniepr-Bug na odcinku od węzła wodnego „Duboj” (km 26) Network, Resolution No.49., Economic Commission for Europe – Inland Transport do węzła wodnego „Lachowicze” (km 73) z poprawą warunków żeglugi. Ministerstwo Committee, New York and Geneva (2013) Transportu i Komunikacji Republiki Białoruś. Krajowe Unitarne Przedsiębiorstwo [7] Kalinowski M., Koba R., Kowalczyk U., (2016). Using cost-benefit analysis as a method Eksploatacyjno-Budowlane „Droga wodna Dniepr-Bug”, Pińsk. (2010) of more efficient allocation of inland waterway E40 resources. Bulletin of the Maritime [18] Rozporządzenie Rady Ministrów z dnia 7 maja 2002 r. w sprawie klasyfikacji Institute in Gdańsk Volume 31 No. 1 śródlądowych dróg wodnych. (2002) [8] Kształtowanie się usług transportowych i prognoza przewozów transportem wodnym [19] Specyfikacje techniczne wykonania i odbioru robót budowlanych w zakresie inżynierii śródlądowym. (1993) HYDROPROJEKT Warszawa Sp. z o.o. wodnej. (2005). Regionalny Zarząd Gospodarki Wodnej w Krakowie [9] Kubiak M., Przedsiębiorstwo Projektowo Wykonawcze „EKOSOFT”, Gdańsk (2015) [20] Studium programowo – przestrzenne rozwoju obszaru funkcjonalnego kanału Wieprz [10] Kulczyk J., Winter J., (2003). Śródlądowy transport wodny. – Krzna z elementami strategii. (2013). Biuro Planowania Przestrzennego w Lublinie Word count: 3040 Page count: 7 Tables: – Figures: 4 References: 20 Scientific Disciplines: Socioeconomics Cite this article as: Kalinowski M., Kuszewski W.: Concept of connection between the Mukhavets and the Bug river as an element of International Waterway E40 development on the Polish-Belarusian border: BMI, 2017; 32(1): 30-36 Copyright: © 2017 Maritime Institute in Gdańsk. Published by Index Copernicus Sp. z o.o. All rights reserved. Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Corresponding author: Marcin Kalinowski, Instytut Morski w Gdańsku. Zakład Ekonomiki i Prawa, Gdańsk, e-mail: marcin.kalinowski@im.gda.pl The content of the journal „Bulletin of the Maritime Institute in Gdańsk” is circulated on the basis of the Open Access which means free and limitless access to scientific data. This material is available under the Creative Commons - Attribution 4.0 GB. The full terms of this license are available on: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/legalcode funds of the Ministry of Science and Higher Education for science promotion.